Wikilambda is an open repository of code that anyone can use and contribute to.

Every page in Wikilambda represents a function. A function has a description,
a list of parameters, test cases, a list of implementations in different
programming languages, and further metadata. The implementations can be reused
in other software projects (private apps or scripts), be called and executed
online (either just in the browser or in a cloud environment such as Google
cloud or Jupyter notebooks), composed to achieve more complex functionality,
signed, analyzed or validated, and much more.

Wikilambda is a project in the spirit of Wikipedia, Wikidata, Wiktionary, and
others, and it allows contributors from all over the world to create and
maintain a library of functions, which can be used by anyone for any purpose.
Every function can be supported by multiple implementations in different
programming languages, test cases, pre- and postconditions, documentation,
metadata in form of runtime estimates and complexity guarantees for the
different implementations, etc. Users may call a function directly on the
Website, or from their own code or applications, from a command line interface,
or a local app. The function may be executed locally in the browser, in the
cloud, or locally and embedded within the users application.

Wikilambda is intended to create both a well-defined common catalog of
functions which can be widely reused, and also an environment where functions
can be quickly combined and executed on the fly. Wikilambda aims to make life
easier for developers, who can rely on this repository like on any external
library, and for end users who can call functions as needed, in a way that is
currently only available with a very uneven coverage through specific websites
who are often written in the form of 1990s Websites with Java Applets.

All Functions are pure, in order to enable a secure sandboxed execution. Also,
every implementation can be annotated with metadata and cryptographically
signed. End users can select and audit which implementation of each function
to use, depending on their available hardware resources and web of trust
settings.

Wikilambda will allow easy access to large knowledge bases such as Wikidata,
but also to binary input and output files. It is entirely possible to upload
an image as an input file and return analysis results such as what is depicted
on the image, or how many different colors the image has - or a different
binary, e.g. in a different format.

Wikilambda continues the tradition of moving more computation, which has
usually happened on the command line or with apps by more computer savvy
computer users, to the Web and democratize access to functionality that
was not available before. At the same time it will increase the productivity
of developers everywhere as they can just use a large library of code instead
of relying on properly copy and pasting answers from StackOverflow.

Unlike in Wikipedia, contributors will mostly create new implementations for a
function instead of updating existing functions. The implementations can be
automatically tested against the given tests, against each other, and further
analyzed.

Implementations can be written in a number of different programming languages,
and yet to be able to call functions implemented in other programming
languages. The execution engine can smoothly (although not necessarily with the
highest possible performance) operate in different languages. Although in most
cases there is a large performance boost by composing functions within a single
programming language, there is no requirement to do so. In many cases, the
speed of development and the developers time will be more valuable than the
additional computer cycles spent in the execution engine.

I would predict that it is important for such a project to eventually find a
steward in an organization like the Wikimedia Foundation, in order to avoid the
issue that limited Freebase's growth, being connected to a commercial entity.
Having a world wide community work together on a library of functions is a
powerful new step for advancing the Web, and the computing world in general.
